All living beings need water to live .
Water is important for proper growth and development of flowers , fruits and seeds of plants .
Water is absorbed by roots .
Along with water , minerals and fertilisers are also absorbed .
Plants contain nearly 90 % water .
Water is essential because germination of seeds does not take place under dry conditions .
Nutrients dissolved in water get transported to each part of the plant .
Water also protects crop from both frost and hot air currents .
To maintain the moisture of the soil for healthy crop growth , fields have to be watered regularly .
The supply of water to crops at different intervals is called irrigation .
The time and frequency of irrigation varies from crop to crop , soil to soil and season to season .
In summer , the frequency of watering is higher .
Sources of irrigation : The sources of irrigation are -- wells , tubewells , ponds , lakes , rivers , dams and canals .
The water available in wells , lakes and canals is lifted up by methods , for taking water to fields .
Cattle or human labour is used in methods .
So methods are cheaper , but less efficient .
The various traditional ways are : moat -LRB- pulley - system -RRB- , chain pump , dekhli and rahat .
Pumps are commonly used for lifting water .
Diesel , biogas , electricity and solar energy is used to run pumps .
Modern methods of irrigation help us to use water economically .
The main methods used are as follows : -LRB- i -RRB- Sprinkler System : system is more useful on the uneven land where sufficient water is not available .
The perpendicular pipes , having nozzles , are joined to the main pipeline at regular intervals .
When water is allowed to flow through pipe with the help of a pump , pipe escapes from nozzles .
It gets sprinkled on crop as if pipe is raining .
Drip system : In system , water falls drop by drop just at the position of roots .
So system is called system .
It is the best technique for watering fruit plants , gardens and trees .
Water is not wasted at all .
It is a boon in regions where availability of water is poor .
